📌 Project Overview

Today's lab focused on troubleshooting a Linux network service that had become inaccessible over a custom TCP port. 
Although the Apache HTTP service was configured to use the correct port and appeared to be running, remote clients were unable to establish a connection.

The objective was to identify the root cause using Linux networking and system administration tools, restore service accessibility, and verify connectivity from a 
remote jump host while preserving the server's security posture.

Objectives
Diagnose why an Apache web service was unreachable on a custom port.
Verify Apache service status and configuration.
Confirm the web server was listening on the expected port.
Test network connectivity between hosts.
Investigate Linux firewall rules.
Restore secure access to the application.
Validate connectivity using curl.
Environment
Component	Description
Operating System	Linux
Web Server	Apache (httpd)
Client	Jump Host
Target Server	App Server 1 (stapp01)
Apache Port	6400
Problem Statement

The monitoring system reported that the Apache web service on App Server 1 was unreachable via port 6400.

Although the service itself might have been down, the issue could also have originated from networking, firewall rules, or server configuration.

Expected verification:

curl http://stapp01:6400
Troubleshooting Process
1. Verify Apache Service Status

Checked whether the Apache service was running.

sudo systemctl status httpd

Initially, Apache failed to start due to an Address already in use error.

2. Identify Port Conflicts

Verified which processes were listening on network ports.

sudo ss -tulpn

After correcting the Apache configuration, the service successfully listened on:

*:6400
3. Verify Apache Configuration

Confirmed Apache was configured to listen on the required port.

grep -R "^Listen" /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf

Output:

Listen 6400
4. Test Local Connectivity

Verified the service responded locally.

curl http://localhost:6400

The page loaded successfully, confirming Apache itself was functioning correctly.

5. Test Remote Connectivity

From the Jump Host:

curl http://stapp01:6400

Received:

curl: (7) Failed to connect
No route to host

This indicated the request never reached Apache and suggested a networking or firewall issue.

6. Inspect Firewall Rules

Since firewalld was not installed, I inspected the active iptables rules.

sudo iptables -L -n

Discovered the INPUT chain contained:

REJECT all -- anywhere anywhere reject-with icmp-host-prohibited

No rule existed permitting inbound traffic on TCP port 6400.

7. Allow Access to Port 6400

Inserted an ACCEPT rule before the REJECT rule.

sudo iptables -I INPUT 5 -p tcp --dport 6400 -j ACCEPT

Verified the rule:

sudo iptables -L -n
8. Validate the Fix

From the Jump Host:

curl http://stapp01:6400

The Apache webpage was successfully returned, confirming the issue had been resolved.

Key Commands Used
sudo systemctl status httpd

sudo systemctl start httpd

sudo ss -tulpn

grep -R "^Listen" /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf

curl http://localhost:6400

curl http://stapp01:6400

sudo iptables -L -n

sudo iptables -I INPUT 5 -p tcp --dport 6400 -j ACCEPT
Root Cause Analysis

The Apache service was correctly configured and actively listening on port 6400.

However, the Linux firewall (iptables) denied all incoming traffic that did not explicitly match an ACCEPT rule.

Since no rule existed for TCP port 6400, every connection attempt was rejected before reaching the Apache service.

Adding an ACCEPT rule for port 6400 restored remote access while maintaining the existing firewall policy.

Skills Practiced
Linux service management
Apache troubleshooting
Network diagnostics
TCP port verification
ss and socket inspection
Client/server connectivity testing
Linux firewall management
iptables rule inspection
Remote service validation
Systematic troubleshooting methodology
Key Takeaways
A running service does not always mean it is reachable.
The error message "No route to host" can indicate firewall rules blocking traffic, not only routing issues.
Always verify each layer of troubleshooting:
Service status
Service configuration
Listening ports
Local connectivity
Remote connectivity
Firewall policies
Linux firewall rules are processed in order, making rule placement critical.
A structured troubleshooting process helps identify root causes efficiently without making unnecessary configuration changes.
Outcome

✅ Apache service restored successfully.

✅ Remote connectivity verified from the Jump Host.

✅ Network access secured by allowing only the required service port.

💡 Reflection

This lab reinforced an important DevOps principle: effective troubleshooting starts with narrowing down the problem layer by layer. Although the initial symptoms suggested an Apache issue, 
the real cause was an iptables rule rejecting inbound traffic. By validating the service, configuration, listening ports, and finally the firewall, I was able to resolve the issue without 
compromising the server's security. This exercise strengthened my confidence in diagnosing Linux network service problems using a methodical, evidence-driven approach.
