🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we create a temporary Linux user account that automatically expires after a defined period. This is a common DevOps and system administration practice used to enforce time-bound access control for contractors, interns, or temporary system access.

🎯 Objective
Create a new Linux user
Assign an expiry date to the user account
Verify account expiration settings
Understand real-world use cases for temporary access control
🧰 Environment
Linux OS (CentOS / Ubuntu lab environment)
SSH access via jump host
sudo/root privileges required
📌 Concept Explanation

Linux allows administrators to set an expiration date for user accounts. After this date:

The user account is automatically disabled
Login attempts will fail
No manual intervention is required

This is done using:

chage

or during user creation with:

useradd -e
🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Create a user with expiry date
sudo useradd -e 2026-07-01 john
🔍 Explanation
useradd → creates a new user
-e → sets account expiry date
2026-07-01 → expiration date (YYYY-MM-DD format)
john → username
2. Set password for the user (if required)
sudo passwd john

In real DevOps environments, passwords are often avoided for temporary automation users.

3. Verify user expiry information
sudo chage -l john
🔍 Expected Output
Last password change                                    : ...
Password expires                                        : never
Account expires                                         : Jul 01, 2026
4. Confirm user entry in system
cat /etc/passwd | grep john

Example output:

john:x:1003:1003::/home/john:/bin/bash

(Expiry is not shown here but stored in shadow/user metadata)

🔐 Security Insight

Temporary users help enforce:

Least privilege access
Time-bound access control
Reduced security risk from forgotten accounts
Compliance with enterprise security policies
🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Contractors	Access ends after project completion
Interns	Limited-time system access
Support engineers	Temporary troubleshooting access
Migration teams	Short-term infrastructure access
Security audits	Controlled access windows
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Using incorrect date format (MM/DD/YYYY instead of YYYY-MM-DD)
❌ Forgetting to verify with chage -l
❌ Confusing password expiry with account expiry
❌ Not documenting expiry dates in production environments
📚 Key Takeaways
Linux supports built-in user expiration policies
useradd -e simplifies temporary access provisioning
chage is used for auditing and modifying account aging settings
Temporary accounts are a key part of security governance in DevOps
🚀 Summary

In this task, we created a Linux user with a defined expiration date, ensuring that access is automatically revoked after a specified period. This improves system security and aligns with enterprise identity and access management practices.
