🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we focus on managing Linux file permissions, specifically granting or restricting execution rights on shell scripts.

This is a fundamental DevOps skill used to control how scripts are executed, who can execute them, and under what conditions. Proper permission management ensures system security, operational safety, and controlled automation execution.

🎯 Objective
Understand Linux file permission model
Modify script execution permissions
Make a script executable
Verify execution behavior
Reinforce secure file access principles
🧰 Environment
Linux server (CentOS / Ubuntu lab environment)
Bash shell
Root or sudo privileges required
📌 Concept Explanation

Linux uses a three-tier permission model:

User (Owner)
Group
Others

Each file has three permission types:

r → read
w → write
x → execute
Why execution permission matters in DevOps:

Scripts are widely used for:

Automation tasks
Deployment pipelines
System maintenance
Backup operations
Monitoring jobs

Without proper permissions, scripts cannot run.

🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Check existing file permissions
ls -l script.sh
🔍 Example Output
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root  120 Apr 10 10:00 script.sh
Interpretation:
No x (execute permission)
Script cannot be run directly
2. Add execute permission
Method 1: Using symbolic mode
chmod +x script.sh
Method 2: Using numeric mode
chmod 755 script.sh
🔍 Permission breakdown (755):
7 = rwx (owner)
5 = r-x (group)
5 = r-x (others)
3. Verify updated permissions
ls -l script.sh

Expected output:

-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 120 Apr 10 10:00 script.sh
4. Execute the script
./script.sh
🔍 Alternative execution method

If not executable:

bash script.sh
🔐 Security Insight

Execution permissions control who can run scripts and programs.

In production systems:

Not all scripts should be executable by everyone
Only trusted users should have execution rights
Critical automation scripts must be protected
Example secure permission model:
File Type	Recommended Permission
System scripts	750
User scripts	700
Shared automation scripts	755
Sensitive scripts	700 or restricted
🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Deployment scripts	Only CI/CD user can execute
Backup scripts	Restricted to admin group
Monitoring scripts	Executed by cron/system users
Security scripts	Locked to root only
Application startup scripts	Controlled by systemd
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Forgetting to add execute permission (chmod +x)
❌ Using overly permissive settings like 777
❌ Running scripts without reviewing contents
❌ Executing scripts as root unnecessarily
❌ Mixing up read/write/execute roles
📚 Key Takeaways
Linux permissions control file security and execution
chmod is a core DevOps tool for system control
Execution rights are required to run scripts directly
Proper permission design reduces security risks
Automation depends heavily on correct file permissions
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we learned how to manage script execution permissions in Linux by using chmod. We ensured that scripts are executable only when explicitly allowed, reinforcing secure and controlled automation practices used in real-world DevOps environments.
