🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we explore SELinux (Security-Enhanced Linux), a mandatory access control (MAC) system that adds an additional layer of security on Linux systems.

Unlike traditional Linux permissions, SELinux enforces strict security policies that control how processes interact with files, ports, and services, even if file permissions allow access.

This makes SELinux a critical component in enterprise-grade Linux security and DevOps hardening practices.

🎯 Objective
Understand SELinux concepts and modes
Install and verify SELinux status
Configure SELinux enforcement levels
Test system behavior under SELinux policies
Reinforce Linux security hardening principles
🧰 Environment
Linux OS (CentOS / RHEL preferred in enterprise setups)
Root or sudo privileges
SELinux-enabled kernel support
📌 Concept Explanation

SELinux adds a security layer on top of standard Linux permissions.

Traditional Linux permissions:
User / Group / Others → rwx
SELinux adds:
Policies controlling WHAT a process can do
🔐 SELinux Modes

SELinux operates in three main modes:

Mode	Description
Enforcing	SELinux actively blocks unauthorized actions
Permissive	SELinux logs violations but does not block
Disabled	SELinux is turned off
🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Check SELinux status
sestatus
🔍 Expected Output
SELinux status:                 enabled
Current mode:                   enforcing
2. Install SELinux packages (if not installed)
sudo yum install -y selinux-policy selinux-policy-targeted

On most enterprise systems, SELinux is pre-installed.

3. Check current configuration file
cat /etc/selinux/config
🔍 Example Output
SELINUX=enforcing
SELINUXTYPE=targeted
4. Modify SELinux mode (if required)

Edit configuration:

sudo vi /etc/selinux/config
Available options:
SELINUX=enforcing
SELINUX=permissive
SELINUX=disabled
⚠️ Important Note
Changes require system reboot
Misconfiguration can block services unexpectedly
5. Temporarily change SELinux mode (without reboot)
Set to enforcing:
sudo setenforce 1
Set to permissive:
sudo setenforce 0
Verify:
getenforce
🔐 Security Insight

SELinux is critical in production environments because it:

Prevents unauthorized process interactions
Restricts service-to-file access
Limits damage from compromised applications
Enforces strict security policies beyond file permissions
Example:

Even if a file has:

-rwxrwxrwx

SELinux can still block access if policy denies it.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Role of SELinux
Web servers	Restricts Apache/Nginx file access
Database servers	Limits DB process file exposure
Multi-tenant systems	Isolates applications
Government systems	Mandatory compliance requirement
Enterprise Linux	Default security layer
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Disabling SELinux permanently without justification
❌ Ignoring SELinux denial logs
❌ Misconfiguring policies and breaking services
❌ Assuming Linux permissions alone are enough
❌ Not checking SELinux when troubleshooting access issues
📚 Key Takeaways
SELinux adds mandatory access control (MAC) on top of Linux permissions
It improves system security significantly in production environments
Modes: enforcing, permissive, disabled
It is a core component of enterprise Linux hardening
DevOps engineers must know how to troubleshoot SELinux issues
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we installed and configured SELinux, learned how it enforces strict security policies, and understood its role in protecting Linux systems from unauthorized access and misconfigurations. SELinux is a foundational security layer in enterprise DevOps environments.
