🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we install and configure Apache Tomcat, a widely used Java application server used to deploy and run Java-based web applications.

This task demonstrates how DevOps engineers manage application server setup, configuration, and deployment of WAR files in a Linux environment.

🎯 Objective
Install Apache Tomcat on a Linux server
Configure Tomcat to run on a custom port
Deploy a Java web application (.war file)
Validate application accessibility via HTTP
Reinforce application deployment workflows
🧰 Environment
Linux server (CentOS / Ubuntu lab environment)
Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
Apache Tomcat
Root/sudo privileges required
Network access to port 8084
📌 Concept Explanation

Apache Tomcat is a lightweight Java application server used to run Java web applications such as:

Servlets
JSP applications
WAR-based deployments
Spring-based legacy apps
Default behavior:
Runs on port: 8080
Deploys applications from: webapps/
Supports .war files (Web Application Archive)
🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Install Tomcat
Ubuntu/Debian:
sudo apt update -y
sudo apt install tomcat9 -y
CentOS/RHEL:
sudo yum install tomcat -y
2. Start and enable Tomcat service
sudo systemctl start tomcat
sudo systemctl enable tomcat
3. Verify Tomcat is running
sudo systemctl status tomcat
4. Configure Tomcat port (Change from 8080 → 8084)

Edit configuration file:

sudo vi /etc/tomcat/server.xml
Modify connector:
<Connector port="8080" protocol="HTTP/1.1"

Change to:

<Connector port="8084" protocol="HTTP/1.1"
5. Restart Tomcat
sudo systemctl restart tomcat
6. Deploy ROOT.war application

Copy WAR file into webapps directory:

sudo cp /tmp/ROOT.war /var/lib/tomcat/webapps/
🔍 Important Concept
ROOT.war means application is deployed at base URL:
http://server-ip:8084/

Instead of:

http://server-ip:8084/app-name
7. Verify deployment

Check Tomcat logs:

tail -f /var/log/tomcat/catalina.out
8. Test application access
curl http://stapp01:8084
🔍 Expected Output
HTML response from deployed application
No connection errors
Status code 200 OK
🔐 Security Insight

Tomcat is a critical application layer component and must be secured properly:

Best practices:
Run Tomcat as a non-root user
Restrict access to management console
Change default ports in production
Use firewall rules (allow only required ports)
Deploy only trusted WAR files
Monitor logs for suspicious activity
🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Enterprise applications	Banking and insurance systems
Legacy Java apps	WAR-based deployments
Internal business tools	HR, payroll systems
API hosting	Java-based backend services
Dev/Test environments	Application staging servers
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Forgetting to restart Tomcat after config change
❌ Incorrect WAR placement directory
❌ Misconfigured port (conflict with other services)
❌ Not checking logs when deployment fails
❌ Missing Java installation dependency
📚 Key Takeaways
Tomcat is a core Java application server in enterprise environments
Applications are deployed as .war files
Configuration changes require service restart
Logs are essential for troubleshooting deployments
Port configuration is a key DevOps responsibility
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we installed and configured Apache Tomcat, changed its default port, and deployed a Java web application using a WAR file. This introduced real-world application deployment concepts used in enterprise DevOps environments.

🎉 End of Day 11 Milestone

At this stage, you now understand:

Linux system administration
Security hardening (SSH, SELinux)
Automation (Bash, Cron, Ansible)
Database troubleshooting (MariaDB)
Application deployment (Tomcat)
Infrastructure mindset (ready for Terraform → cloud scaling)
