🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we focus on writing and executing Bash scripts to automate repetitive tasks in Linux. Bash scripting is one of the most fundamental skills in DevOps, enabling engineers to automate system administration, deployments, monitoring, and maintenance tasks.

This task builds the foundation for automation-first thinking, which is a core principle of DevOps engineering.

🎯 Objective
Understand Bash scripting basics
Create and execute a shell script
Use variables, commands, and logic in scripts
Improve automation skills in Linux environments
Reinforce DevOps automation principles
🧰 Environment
Linux system (CentOS / Ubuntu lab environment)
Bash shell (/bin/bash)
Text editor (vi, nano)
Execute permissions required
📌 Concept Explanation

A Bash script is a file containing a sequence of Linux commands executed in order.

Basic structure:
#!/bin/bash

echo "Hello DevOps"
Key Components:
#!/bin/bash → Shebang (defines interpreter)
echo → prints output
.sh file extension → script file
🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Create a Bash script file
vi devops-script.sh
2. Write the script
#!/bin/bash

echo "Starting DevOps Automation Script"
date
whoami
uptime
🔍 Explanation:
Command	Purpose
echo	Displays messages
date	Shows system date/time
whoami	Displays current user
uptime	Shows system load
3. Save and exit file

In vi:

ESC → :wq → ENTER
4. Give execution permission
chmod +x devops-script.sh
5. Execute the script
./devops-script.sh
🔍 Expected Output
Starting DevOps Automation Script
Mon Jun 29 12:00:00 UTC 2026
root
12:00:01 up 10 days, load average: 0.10, 0.05, 0.01
🔐 Security Insight

Bash scripts are powerful and can:

Modify system files
Start/stop services
Delete or create resources
Automate deployments
DevOps best practices:
Always review scripts before execution
Avoid running unknown scripts as root
Use least privilege principle
Store scripts in version control (Git)
Validate input in production scripts
🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Deployment automation	Deploy applications automatically
System monitoring	Check CPU, memory, disk usage
Backup scripts	Automate data backups
Log cleanup	Remove old log files
User management	Automate user creation
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Forgetting chmod +x
❌ Missing shebang (#!/bin/bash)
❌ Using incorrect file paths
❌ Running scripts without testing
❌ Hardcoding sensitive values
📚 Key Takeaways
Bash scripting is the backbone of Linux automation
Scripts help eliminate repetitive manual tasks
Execution permissions are required to run scripts
DevOps heavily relies on scripting for automation
Good scripting improves system efficiency and reliability
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we created and executed a Bash script to automate system commands in Linux. This introduced core automation principles used in DevOps workflows, enabling repeatable and efficient system administration.

🎉 End of Day 10 (Major Milestone)

At this point, you’ve built:

Linux administration foundation
Security hardening skills
Automation with scripts and cron
Configuration management exposure (Ansible)
Basic troubleshooting skills
Application deployment (Tomcat)
Database troubleshooting (MariaDB)
