📘 Day 1: Linux User Setup with Non-Interactive Shell
🧭 Project Overview

This task focuses on creating and managing a Linux user account with a non-interactive shell, ensuring that the user cannot log in interactively but can still be used for system-level operations such as running scripts or services.

This is a foundational Linux administration skill widely used in DevOps for service accounts, automation users, and security hardening.

🎯 Objective
Create a new Linux user
Assign a non-interactive shell
Verify that the user cannot initiate an interactive login session
Understand use cases for restricted system users
🧰 Environment
Linux distribution: CentOS / Ubuntu (Lab environment)
Access: SSH via jump host/terminal
Privileges: sudo/root access required
📌 Concept Explanation

A non-interactive shell is a shell that does not allow the user to log in and interact with the system.

Common non-interactive shells:

/sbin/nologin
/usr/sbin/nologin
/bin/false
Why this matters in DevOps:

In production systems, not all users are human. Some are:

Application service accounts
Automation users (CI/CD pipelines)
Backup agents
Monitoring tools

These users should exist without login capability for security reasons.

🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Create the user with a non-interactive shell
sudo useradd -s /sbin/nologin john
🔍 Explanation:
useradd → creates a new user
-s → specifies the login shell
/sbin/nologin → prevents interactive login
john → username (example)
2. Set password (optional depending on lab requirement)
sudo passwd john

In most DevOps environments, service users do NOT require passwords.

3. Verify user shell configuration
cat /etc/passwd | grep john

Expected output:

john:x:1002:1002::/home/john:/sbin/nologin
4. Test login restriction
su - john

Expected result:

This account is currently not available.

or

This account is not available.
🔐 Security Insight

Using a non-interactive shell ensures:

No SSH access
No terminal login
Reduced attack surface
Controlled automation execution environment

This is a key principle in least privilege access control.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Use Case	Description
Web server user	Runs Nginx/Apache processes
CI/CD user	Jenkins/GitHub runners
Database service user	MySQL/PostgreSQL service accounts
Monitoring tools	Prometheus node exporters
Backup agents	Automated backup systems
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Forgetting to set shell during user creation
❌ Using /bin/bash instead of /sbin/nologin
❌ Assuming password is required for service users
❌ Testing login incorrectly using SSH instead of su
📚 Key Takeaways
Linux users can be created for services, not just humans
Non-interactive shells improve system security
DevOps engineers must understand user lifecycle management
This is foundational for automation and production-grade systems
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we created a restricted Linux user with no login capability, reinforcing the principle of secure system design. This pattern is widely used in production environments to ensure that service accounts cannot be abused for unauthorized access.
