🧭 Project Overview

In this exercise, we configure SSH access on a Linux server to secure the root user login behavior. This is a critical system hardening practice used in DevOps and production environments to prevent unauthorized or risky direct root access.

Instead of allowing direct root login, administrators enforce controlled access through standard users with elevated privileges.

🎯 Objective
Secure SSH configuration for root access
Disable or restrict direct root login via SSH
Ensure safer administrative access practices
Reinforce Linux security hardening principles
🧰 Environment
Linux server (CentOS / Ubuntu lab environment)
SSH service (sshd)
Root or sudo privileges required
📌 Concept Explanation

By default, SSH may allow root login depending on configuration. However, this is high risk in production environments.

Why direct root SSH is dangerous:
No accountability (shared root access)
High risk of brute-force attacks
Full system compromise if credentials are leaked
No audit trail per user
Recommended DevOps approach:

Instead of logging in as root:

SSH → regular user → sudo privileges
🛠️ Implementation Steps
1. Open SSH configuration file
sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config
2. Locate root login directive

Find:

PermitRootLogin yes
3. Disable root login

Update it to:

PermitRootLogin no
🔍 Explanation
PermitRootLogin no → completely disables root SSH login
Forces users to log in with a normal account first
🔐 Alternative (More Flexible Option)

In some environments, root login is allowed but restricted:

PermitRootLogin prohibit-password

This allows root login only via SSH keys (not password authentication).

4. Restart SSH service

After making changes:

CentOS / RHEL
sudo systemctl restart sshd
Ubuntu
sudo systemctl restart ssh
5. Verify SSH configuration

Check service status:

sudo systemctl status sshd

or

sudo systemctl status ssh
6. Test SSH behavior

Try logging in as root:

ssh root@server-ip

Expected result:

Permission denied (publickey,password).
🔐 Security Insight

This configuration enforces:

Principle of least privilege
Controlled administrative access
Better auditability through user accounts
Reduced attack surface on SSH service
🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Production servers	Root login disabled completely
Cloud environments	AWS EC2 uses key-based sudo users
Enterprise systems	Centralized access via IAM or LDAP
DevOps pipelines	Automated access via service accounts
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Forgetting to restart SSH after changes
❌ Locking yourself out by disabling sudo user access
❌ Editing wrong SSH config file
❌ Not testing access before closing session
❌ Using root login in production environments
📚 Key Takeaways
Direct root SSH access is a security risk
SSH configuration is a core DevOps skill
Standard users with sudo access are preferred
SSH hardening is part of system security baseline
Small config changes can significantly improve security posture
🚀 Summary

In this exercise, we hardened SSH access by disabling direct root login, enforcing safer administrative practices. This is a standard security measure in production environments to protect Linux systems from unauthorized root-level access.
